# DH2323 CGI-Project
# Unity compute shader N-body simulation
# Roman Boiko
## Introduction 29.04
This is the first blog entry of my project. Implementation was done before the blog began so many subsequent entries will be written post-factum. Main idea of the project is to implement a technique called "Fast N-body simulation with GPU on CUDA" from GPU Gems 3 book on Unity engine. I will call this work the "original article" starting from here.(link) Core of the idea is multithreaded acceleration calculation done on the GPU which can be similarly implemented in Unity using a compute shader.
## Preliminal research and overall project outline 30.04 (actually done on 19.04)
To better understand what kind of souce code is needed for the project to work I spent some time researching the topic of compute shaders and thoroughly reading the original article. When loking at other implementations of updating postions of a large number of bodies in unity (namely this particular video by ___) I made important overarching decisions about the architecture of the final Unity project. Turned out that compute shader itself should essentially be a standalone function which will take in current system state and return updated positions and velocities. Compute shader is in turn called by the main control script, attached to some empty GameObject in Unity. Coordinates by themself are not enough to get an image, bodies need to be rendered by a shader. It would be possible to use a large amount of GameObjects but that is highly inneficient and so a specific shader needs to be created. This shader should take in only the positions and render appropriate meshes in those places. In total, system would consist of 3 parts: controller, shader and compute shader. (maybe a picture)
## Controller and shader 30.04 (20.04)
At first I decided to focus on getting the Unity to just render a cloud of bodies, without any movement. To do this a controller and the shader were needed. I decided to use VS Code for coding as it was already installed.  Creating a controller script was fairly straightforward, using aforementioned video as an example. For data storage an array of "body" structs were created, each including postions, velocities and mass. In contrast, writing a shader proved to be extremely difficult, as I have no experience with neither the engine nor the language or Unity shader specific methods. I have tried to modify the existing default shader code unity provides, asking questions from AI (Copilot in MS Edge), but to no avail. In the end I entrusted the whole shader to the same AI based on my existing structs and variables. The generated shader could only render a single body, so I had to go through many iterations, utilising both Edge Copilot as well as Claude Haiku 4.5 agent integrated into VS Code. At last the shader rendered multiple bodies.
## Compute shader - 1st iteration 30.04 (21.04)
1st iteration of the compute hsader was created with Claude Haiku 4.5 agent integrated into VS Code by feeding it algorithms from the original article. Agent took a lot of liberties, heavily changing the ernel algorithm responsible for acceleration calculation. Thread syncronization was removed and formula of acceleration altered. The compute shader worked and now it was possible to run the first few simulations.
## Compute shader - 2nd iteration 01.05 (23.04)
Having doubts about differences between the original article and my existing algorithm I decided to try reimplementing the kernel. This time I also used previously mentioned gnerative AI for creating code. After a few iterations the kernel had a proper syncronization and a more similar acceleration calculation.

## Counting Flops and Optimizing input 09.05-10.05
Comparisons with the original article would require the number of floating point operations (flops). I decided to estimate this number through frametime. Since body positions are updated every frame and the amount of interactions calculated is N*N, with each interaction being 20 flops, then total number of flops can be estimated as FPS * 20 * N * N. This is not entirely accurate, as frame generation also includes rendering, integration etc, so amount of flops is underestimated. Still, the interactions calculation is the most computationally expensive part there is, so the number should be accurate enough.

To do tests with different thread numbers and different amount of bodies it would be good to be able to change parameters through the inspector. The previous version of the programme had only the number of bodies N changeable, as well as gravitational constant and max radius from center where the bodies would spawn. This was done through using Serializefields. I have tried implementing the same for thread number, but it turned out that compute shaders do not accept dynamic values, so thread number must be changed internally.

## First commit ever 15.05

Today I finally added the code files to the Git. After attending a project help session I realized I was supposed to be gradually implementing the project and documenting it here, but it is a little bit too late. However, the project still needs some expansion so likely there will be future updates.

## Loop unrolling experiments 03.06

Original article mentions loop unrolling improving performance slightly. There was indeed a slight impovement after a single unroll, but subsequent unrolls had a detrimental effect.
